# Static Gallery

Static Gallery is a simple static site generator written in Python. Images
and image galleries are supported as first class objects. Modern,
well-structured HTML/CSS is encouraged, and JavaScript is 100% optional.
Supports Markdown for source text, and Jinja templates for output.

## Prerequisites

* [Python 3.14](https://python.org/)
* [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/)

## Usage

Static Gallery is a CLI application. Run `uv run gallery --help` from your
command shell of choice to list options. Here are the basics:

`--source`: set the source directory (default is the current working
directory)

`--target`: sets the target directory (default is `.public`)

`--config`: sets the root configuration file (default is `site.conf` in the
root of the source directory)

## Configuration

The root of the site source directory **must** contain a `site.conf` file.
Config files consists of one entry per line, each containing a key and a
value, separated by a colon.

```
title: Brian Van Horne's Home Page
language: en-us
url: https://brianvanhorne.com/
```

Current supported values are:

**Title**: the title of the site
**URL**: the base URL of the site
**Language**: the locale and language code of the site (e.g. "en-us")

Keys are case-insensitive (e.g., "title", "TITLE", and "TiTLe" all map to
the same value).

Non-recognized keys are allowed, and are available to the system for use
in generating target files.

## Markdown Files

The *content* of markdown files will be parsed in accordance with the
CommonMark spec.

For metadata (title, author, date) an optional header will be supported. If
the first line of a markdown file is consists of a key/value pair separated
by a colon, the the file contains a header, and all contiguous key/value
lines will be parsed as the header, until a blank line is encountered. For
example:

```
Title: My Blog Post
Date: 2026-03-01

This is the *first* line of my blog post.
```

In this trivial example, The first two lines are parsed as header lines,
making "title" and "date" available to the system as page metadata (as with
configuration, keys are case-insensitive), the third line is the header/body
separator, and is discarded, and the fourth line is passed on to the markdown
parser as the content.

## Workflow

The system starts by scanning the root of the site source directory for a
`site.conf` and parsing it. If one is not found, or if the file cannot be
parsed, it will exit with an error.

Next, scan the directory for any remaining items. We use a two pass system,
so first scan the tree and create a graph of work required to build the site,
and then do the work. Use the following rules:

1. Ignore all files and directories that begin with a dot (`.`).
2. Markdown files (`*.md`) will be processed as content and the resulting
HTML file mapped to a corresponding location in the target tree.
3. Images (`*.jpeg`, `*.jpg`, `*.webp`, `*.png`) will also be processed as
content, by default, creating a single HTML page for each image and mapping
it to the corresponding location in the target tree. The image itself will
also be mapped to the target tree in the same location.
4. Static assets (`*.css`, `*.js`, and anything else) will be mapped directly
over to the corresponding location in the target tree.

### Precedence and Name Collisions

In generating HTML pages, markdown files take precedence over images. For
example, if both `about.md` and `about.jpg` exist in the same source
directory, `about.html` in the target directory will be generated by the
contents of `about.md` and `about.jpg` is simply treated as a static asset.

### A Simple Example

Given the following source tree:
```
├── site.conf
├── index.md
├── about.md
├── portrait.jpg
├── news
│   ├── index.md
│   ├── today.md
│   └── today.jpg
└── styles.css
```

First, the system will locate `site.conf` and parse it.

Next, it will scan through the remaining files:

* `index.md` will be used to generate `index.html` in the target tree
* `about.md` will be used to generate `about.html` in the target tree
* `portrait.jpg` will be used to generate `portrait.html` in the target tree
**and** will also be copied over as a static asset to `portrait.jpg`
* `news` is a directory, so the system will recursively scan it:
  * `news/index.md` will be parsed and mapped to `news/index.html`
  * `news/today.md` will be parsed and mapped to `news/today.html`
  * `news/today.jpg` conflicts with `today.md` and will not generate an HTML
  file, but will still be copied as an asset to `news/today.jpg` in the target
  tree
* `styles.css` is a static asset, and will simply be copied over to
`styles.css` in the target tree with no parsing

The resulting target tree should look like this:

```
├── index.html      <-- generated from index.md
├── about.html      <-- generated from about.md
├── portrait.html   <-- generated from portrait.jpg
├── portrait.jpg    <-- copied from portrait.jpg
├── news
│   ├── index.html  <-- generated from news/index.md
│   ├── today.html  <-- generated from news/today.md
│   └── today.jpg   <-- copied from news/today.jpg
└── styles.css      <-- copied from styles.css
```

## References

* [Jinja Documentation](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/)
* [CommonMark Spec](https://spec.commonmark.org/)
